.TH "SSU-ALIGN" 1 "@RELEASEDATE@" "@PACKAGE@ @RELEASE@" "@PACKAGE@ Manual"

.SH NAME
SSU-ALIGN(package) - alignment, masking and visualization of SSU rRNA sequences

.SH SYNOPSIS

.B ssu-align
  Align small subunit ribosomal RNA (16S/18S SSU rRNA) sequences

.B ssu-build
  Build SSU rRNA covariance models from multiple sequence alignment(s)

.B ssu-draw
  Draw secondary structure diagrams of SSU rRNA

.B ssu-mask
  Mask (remove columns from) SSU rRNA multiple sequence alignments

.B ssu-merge
  Merge SSU rRNA alignments created by parallel ssu-align jobs

.B ssu-prep
  Prepare SSU rRNA sequences for parallel ssu-align jobs

.SH DESCRIPTION

.PP
SSU-ALIGN is a suite of several programs for creating, masking and
visualizing small subunit ribosomal RNA (SSU rRNA) multiple sequence
alignments. It uses profile probabilistic models called "profile
hidden Markov models" (profile HMMs) and "covariance models" (CMs)
that represent archaeal 16S SSU rRNA, bacterial 16S SSU rRNA and
eukaryotic 18S SSU rRNA. Each of these profile models was built from a
reference alignment derived from Robin Gutell's Comparative RNA
Website database (CRW) (Cannone et al., BMC Bionformatics. 2002; 3:2.)
as described in the user's guide.  The alignments created by SSU-ALIGN
explicitly take into account the conserved secondary structure of SSU
as annotated by CRW. SSU-ALIGN output alignments are created at a rate
of roughly one sequence per second for full length SSU sequences.

.PP
The main program,
.B ssu-align
takes a FASTA-formatted sequence file containing SSU sequences,
classifies them by domain of life (i.e. archaea, bacteria, or eukarya)
and creates structurally annotated domain-specific alignments. 

.PP
.B ssu-mask 
removes columns from (masks) alignments created by 
.B ssu-align
that are likely to contain alignment errors. The set of columns to
remove is determined based on per-nucleotide confidence estimates
(posterior probabilities, annotated in 'PP' lines) contained within
the alignments as calculated by
.B ssu-align. 
Alternatively, preset masks can be applied to remove a consistent set
of columns to allow comparison across multiple datasets.
.B ssu-mask
can also be used to convert alignments to aligned FASTA and to remove
a subset of sequences from an alignment. 

.PP
The 
.B ssu-draw
program generates secondary structure diagrams of SSU in postscript or PDF
format from 
.B ssu-align
generated alignments. (PDF is possible only if a postscript to pdf
converter like 'ps2pdf' is in your PATH). Diagrams of individual
aligned sequences or alignment summary statistics can be generated. 

.PP
The
.B ssu-prep
program can be used for splitting up large sequence files into many
smaller ones to be aligned separately in parallel on a cluster or
multi-core machine. It outputs a shell
script that will execute the set of parallel 
.B ssu-align 
jobs and then automatically merge their results. The final alignments will be identical
to what would have been created by a single 
.B ssu-align
job that processed the full original sequence file. 

.PP
.B ssu-merge
merges the results of a set of parallel 
.B ssu-align 
jobs created by 
.B ssu-prep.
It is automatically called by the final 
.B ssu-align 
job of the set, and so should only be necessary to be called manually
on the command-line in the event that one or more of the jobs fail. If
this happens, only the failed jobs need be rerun, and then the full
set can be merged by executing
.B ssu-merge. 

.PP
Finally, 
.B ssu-build
constructs new profile models (CMs) from input structurally
annotated alignments. These can either be full length or partial SSU
models. For example, models that represent only hypervariable region
V4 can be constructed for aligning datasets from a PCR-based study
that targetted the V4 region.

.PP
SSU-ALIGN is designed to be able to create and manipulate very large
alignments (up to millions of sequences). The main limitation for large
alignments is the time required to create them (about 1
sequence/second/cpu). The memory requirements of 
SSU-ALIGN are effectively independent of the number of sequences in
the alignments.

.PP
Each of the six programs has its own man page.

.PP
The SSU-ALIGN programs internally execute programs from the INFERNAL
package and the Easel sequence analysis library. INFERNAL is developed
by Eric Nawrocki, Diana Kolbe, and Sean Eddy. Easel is developed by
Sean Eddy. The INFERNAL and Easel programs installed with SSU-ALIGN
include a
.I ssu-
prefix to distinguish them from separate installations
of INFERNAL and/or Easel that may be on your system. For example, the
.B cmsearch
INFERNAL program used by SSU-ALIGN is called
.B ssu-cmsearch. 
Each of these programs has its own man page as well.
