.TH "ssu-draw" 1  "@RELEASEDATE@" "@PACKAGE@ @RELEASE@" "@PACKAGE@ Manual"

.SH NAME
ssu-draw - draw secondary structure diagrams of SSU rRNA

.SH SYNOPSIS

.PP 
Draw structure diagrams for all alignments created by ssu-align in directory <dir>:

.PP
.B ssu-draw
.I [options]
.I dir

.PP 
Draw structure diagrams for a single alignment file <aln>:

.PP
.B ssu-draw -a
.I [options]
.I aln

.SH DESCRIPTION

.PP
.B ssu-draw
reads alignments created by 
.B ssu-align, 
calculates per-consensus-column statistics on them and creates
secondary structure diagrams that display those statistics using "heat
map"-like color schemes. The statistics are also printed in tabular
format to output text files for easy parsing. 
.B ssu-draw
can also draw secondary structure diagrams of individual
sequences in the alignment with the 
.B --indi
option.

.PP
Alignment masks,
which define a subset of consensus positions to exclude from an alignment
for purposes such as phylogenetic inference, can be displayed on the
structure diagrams. Positions excluded by the mask will be drawn as
open circles. 
Consensus columns are those which have a non-gap
(non-'.') character in the reference annotation for the alignment. The
reference annotation appears in lines beginning with "#=GC RF".
.B ssu-draw 
will automatically display masks created by
.B ssu-mask
if they exist in the same directory as the alignments.

.PP
An important caveat of 
.B ssu-draw
is that only consensus positions of the SSU models
models are drawn. Inserted residues (i.e. any target residue that does
not align to a consensus alignment position) are not drawn. 
Another important limitation is that 
.B ssu-draw 
cannot draw diagrams for alignments created by 
.B ssu-align
using models other than the default ones (with the 
.B -m
option to 
.B ssu-align
) unless the motivated user creates their own template postscript
file for the models being used. For more information on this, see the 
.B ssu-esl-ssdraw
manual page.

.SH OUTPUT
The secondary structure diagrams created by
.B ssu-draw
are either pdf or postscript files. 
If the executable program
.B ps2pdf
exists in the user's path, the files will be pdf. If not,
they will be postscript. The 
.B --ps2pdf
and 
.B --ps-only 
options, described below, can be used to modify this default behavior.

.PP
By default, a single pdf or postscript that contains nine pages will
be drawn for each alignment. The nine pages are alignment summary
diagrams and display the alignment consensus
sequence, information content, mutual information, insert
frequency, average insert length, deletion frequency, internal
deletion frequency, average posterior probability and fraction of
sequences that span each position, respectively. The consensus
sequence can be displayed on these alignment summary diagrams if the 
.B --cnt
option is used.

Additionally, the alignment statistics that are displayed in the
structure diagrams are printed in tabular format to output text
files ending with the ".drawtab" suffix to allow easy parsing.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B -h
Print brief help; includes version number and summary of
all options.

.TP
.B -a
Specify that the single command-line argument is a Stockholm alignment
file, not a directory.

.TP
.B -f
Force; override the limitation that structure diagram files 
file, not a directory.

.TP
.B -d
Display the pre-calculated, default @PACKAGE@-@PACKAGE_VERSION@ masks
on the secondary structure diagrams. Positions excluded by the mask
will appear as open circles. 

.TP
.BI -s " <f>"
Display the pre-calculated mask in file 
.I <f>.
This option will only work on a single alignment, so either
.B -a
must be used, or 
.I <dir> 
must only contain a single alignment.
The path and file specified by 
.I <f>
must exist either with respect to the current working directory or
SSUALIGNDIR (environment variable)..

.TP
.BI -k " <s>"
Display pre-calculate masks in files called
.I <modelname>.<s>.mask
on the secondary structure diagrams
for alignments created by 
.B ssu-align 
with models named
.I <modelname>. 
If 
.B ssu-align
was used with the default CM file, 
.I <modelname> 
will be 'archaea', 'bacteria' or 'eukarya'.
The mask files must exist in either the current working directory, the
directory that includes the alignments being masked, or SSUALIGNDIR. 

.TP
.BI -m " <f>"
Specify that the CM file
.I <f>
was used by 
.B ssu-align 
to create the alignment(s) being masked with a command like
.B ssu-align -m 
.I <s>
.B foo.fa foo.
.I <f>
must be a path that exists with respect to
either the current working directory or SSUALIGNDIR. 

.TP
.BI -t " <f>"
Specify that the template postscript file to use for drawing secondary
structure diagrams is file
.I <f>. 
If not used, the default @PACKAGE@-@PACKAGE-VERSION@ template file
will be used. 
.I <f>
must be a path that exists with respect to
either the current working directory or SSUALIGNDIR. 

.TP
.B -i
Specify that the 
.B -i 
option was used by
.B ssu-align 
to create the alignments being masked. 

.SH MISCELLANEOUS INPUT/OUTPUT OPTIONS:

.TP
.BI --ps2pdf " <s>"
Specify that an executable named 
.I <s>
in your PATH can be used for converting postscript files to pdf files
with the usage: 
.BI <s> " foo.ps foo.pdf"

.TP
.B --ps-only
Specify that postscript output is preferable to pdf. 
No postscript to pdf conversion will be attempted.

.TP
.BI --ifile " <f>"
Insert information for the alignment, created by 
.B ssu-align,
is in file 
.I <f>.
This option only works in combination with 
.B -a.

.TP
.BI --key-out " <s>"
Include the string 
.I <s>
as part of all output file names from
.B ssu-draw,
immediately before the suffix. For example, foo.archaea.<s>.pdf would
be created instead of foo.archaea.pdf.

.TP
.BI --no-mask
Do not display masks on the structure diagrams. By default, 
.B ssu-draw
will display masks created by
.B ssu-mask
if they exist in the same directory as the alignments.

.TP
.BI --mask-key " <s>"
Specify that the mask files created by 
.B ssu-mask
include the string 
.I <s>
before the ".mask" suffix. This will be true if the
.BI --key-out " <s>"
option was used when 
.B ssu-mask
was run.

.SH OPTIONS FOR ONE PAGE ALIGNMENT SUMMARY DIAGRAMS:
In addition to the default nine page diagram displaying all available
alignment statistics, each of the nine statistics can be drawn on
single page diagrams using the following options. The output files
will be named automatically based on the alignment file name.

.TP 
.B --prob
Draw a single page diagram displaying average posterior probability
per consensus position for each alignment to a file.

.TP 
.B --ifreq
Draw a single page diagram displaying frequency of inserts after each
consensus position for each alignment to a file.

.TP 
.B --iavglen
Draw a single page diagram displaying average insert length after each
consensus position for each alignment to a file.

.TP 
.B --dall
Draw a single page diagram displaying the fraction of sequences that
have a gap (deletion) at each consensus position for each alignment to a
file.

.TP 
.B --dint
Draw a single page diagram displaying the fraction of sequences that
have an internal gap (internal deletion) at each consensus position for each
alignment to a file. An internal gap for a sequence is one that
occurs after (3' of) the first aligned nongap residue in the sequence
and before (5' of) the final aligned nongap residue in the sequence.

.TP 
.B --span
Draw a single page diagram displaying the fraction of sequences that
span each consensus position for each alignment to a file.  A sequence
s spans consensus position 'x' that is actual alignment position 'a'
if s has at least one non-gap residue aligned to a position 'b' <= 'a'
and at least one non-gap residue aligned to a position 'c' >= 'a'

.TP 
.B --info
Draw a single page diagram displaying the information content
of each consensus position for each alignment to a file. 

.TP 
.B --mutinfo
Draw a single page diagram displaying the mutual information per
basepaired position for each alignment to a file. 

.TP 
.B --no-aln
Do not draw the default nine page diagram displaying all available
statistics.

.SH OPTIONS FOR DRAWING STRUCTURE DIAGRAMS FOR INDIVIDUAL SEQUENCES:

Structure diagrams for individual sequences can be drawn, one sequence
per page. For each sequence, an additional page displaying the
posterior probability for the sequence will be drawn. To draw all
sequences in the alignment, use the 
.B --indi
option. 
The resulting pdf or postscript files will be large for large
alignments. For pdfs, the file size will be about 1
Mb for every 20 sequences. For postscript file, the size will be about
1 Mb for every 2 sequences. 

If you only want to draw individual diagrams for a subset of the
sequences in the alignment, use
.B ssu-mask
with the 
.B --seq-r 
or 
.B --seq-k
options to create an alignment of the subset of sequences you want to
draw, and then run
.B ssu-draw
on that alignment with the
.B -a
option. See the 
.B ssu-mask 
manual page for more information.

.TP 
.B --indi
Draw sequence and posterior probability diagrams for all sequences 
in each alignment.

.TP 
.B --rf
Draw a single page diagram displaying the model's reference 
sequence/structure to a file. The sequence displayed will be the
exact sequence from the #=GC RF annotation of the alignment file. 

.TP 
.B --cons
Draw a single page diagram displaying the alignment consensus 
sequence to a file. The consensus sequence is defined as the most
frequent nucleotide at each position. Nucleotides that occur in at
least 75% of the sequences that do not have a gap at the position will
be uppercase; others will be lowercase.

.TP 
.B --no-prob
With 
.B --indi,
do not draw posterior probability diagrams, only draw individual
sequence diagrams.

.SH OPTIONS FOR OMITTING SECTIONS OF STRUCTURE DIAGRAMS:

.TP 
.B --no-leg 
Omit the legend from all structure diagrams.

.TP 
.B --no-head
Omit the header from all structure diagrams.

.TP 
.B --no-foot
Omit the footer from all structure diagrams.

