.TH "ssu-align" 1 "May 2010" "SSU-ALIGN 0.1" "SSU-ALIGN Manual"

.SH NAME
ssu-align - align small subunit ribosomal RNA (16s/18s SSU rRNA) sequences

.SH SYNOPSIS

.B ssu-align
.I [options]
.I seqfile
.I output-dir

.SH DESCRIPTION

.PP
.B ssu-align
identifies archaeal, bacterial and eukaryotic SSU rRNA sequences in 
the target sequence file 
.I seqfile
and aligns them using CMs to create domain-specific SSU multiple sequence
alignments. 

.PP
The
.I seqfile 
must be in FASTA format. The sequences within the file should each contain 0 or 1
SSU or partial SSU sequences. Only the top-scoring SSU sequence
within each sequence will be aligned, so the 
.I seqfile 
should not contain long sequences like a bacterial genome or
eukaryotic chromosomes, because only one SSU sequence per target
sequence will be identified and aligned. The SSU sequence can be on
either strand of a sequence (be part of either the actual sequence in
the file, or its reverse complement).

.PP
CMs are probabilistic profile models of RNA consensus sequence and
secondary structure. CM files can include one or more models.  The
default CM file, 
.B ssu-align-0p1.cm,
will be used by 
.B ssu-align
unless the
.BI -m " <s>" 
option is set to specify that CM file
.I <s>
be used instead.
The default CM file contains three CMs: an archaeal 16S SSU model, a
bacterial 16S SSU model and a eukaryotic 18S SSU model. These models were
built from structural alignments from Robin Gutell's Comparative RNA Website
database (CRW) (Cannone et al., BMC Bionformatics. 2002; 3:2.) as
described in the SSU-ALIGN user's guide. Other CM files can be created using 
.B ssu-build.

.PP
.B ssu-align 
proceeds through two stages to create alignments.  
In the first stage, the best-matching model and the begin and end
positions of the SSU (sub)sequence are defined for each target
sequence. This is achieved by searching each target with
.I n
HMMs, one for each of the 
.I n
models in the CM file
to find the highest scoring SSU hit:
the subsequence defined by a begin and end position that has the
highest bit score to each HMM.  In this stage, only primary sequence
conservation contributes to the score. The model that finds the
highest scoring hit for each target sequence is that sequence's 'best-matching' 
model.  If the best-matching model's hit has a score
greater than a minimum bit score (by default 50 bits, but changeable to
.I <x> 
with 
.BI -b " <x>"
) and a length greater than a minimum length (by default 1 nucleotide, but changeable to 
.I <n>
with 
.BI -l " <n>"
), 
the target subsequence survives to stage 2. 

.PP
In stage 2, each surviving target subsequence defined by the begin and
end positions of the highest scoring hit is extracted (that is, 
suspected non-SSU nucleotides at the begin and ends may be trimmed
off) and aligned to its best-matching model. At this stage, both
primary sequence and well-nested secondary structure conservation of
the SSU model are taken into account during alignment. 

.PP 
.B ssu-align
is a PERL script that executes C programs from the  INFERNAL 
package (bundled within the SSU-ALIGN package), such as 
.B ssu-cmalign
and 
.B ssu-cmsearch,
as well as C executable 'miniapps' from the EASEL sequence analysis library
package, such as 
.B ssu-esl-sfetch.
All necessary INFERNAL and EASEL programs are installed with the
SSU-ALIGN package and are prefixed with 'ssu-' to differentiate them
from programs from INFERNAL installations on your machine. For
example, the executable program
.B cmsearch
is actually 
.B ssu-cmsearch.
	
.PP
.B ssu-align
creates a directory called
.I output-dir
into which it places all of its output files. Several different types
of output files are created including alignments and unaligned hits
for each model that is the best-matching model for at least one
sequence. As each file is created, its name and a very brief
description is printed as part of 
.B ssu-align's 
standard output. The file types are described in more detail in the
user guide.
All output file names begin with 
.I output-dir
followed by a '.'. 
The file <output-dir>.ssu-align.sum includes the standard output of
the program. The file <output-dir>.ssu-align.log includes all of the 
commands (with options) executed by 
.B ssu-align,
such as 
.B ssu-cmsearch 
and
.B ssu-cmalign 
commands.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B -h
Print brief help; includes version number and summary of
all options.

.TP
.B -f
Allow output directory 
.I output-dir
to be deleted and
overwritten. Without this option, if the
.I output-dir
directory already exists, 
.B ssu-align 
exits with an error.

.TP
.BI -m " <f>"
Use CM file
.I <f>
instead of the default three model (archaea, bacteria, eukarya) 
SSU-ALIGN 0.1 CM file. 

.TP
.BI -b " <x>"
Set the minimum bit score threshold for stage 1 survival of an HMM hit as
.I <x>.
Only hits that meet or exceed this threshold will be aligned in stage 2.
By default, 
.I <x>
is 50 bits. 

.TP
.BI -l " <n>"
Set the minimum length threshold for stage 1 survival of
an HMM hit as
.I <x>.
Only hits that meet or exceed this threshold will be aligned in stage
2 so this is the minimum sequence length allowed in any of the output alignments.
By default, 
.I <n>
is 1. Note that each hit still must exceed the minimum bit score
threshold. 

.TP 
.B -i
Output alignments as interleaved Stockholm format in which each
sequence is split up across several lines, instead of the default
Pfam Stockholm format in which each sequence occurs on exactly one
line. Importantly, if 
.B -i 
is set for 
.B ssu-align,
subsequent calls of 
.B ssu-mask
and/or
.B ssu-draw 
on the same 
.I output-dir
must also include
.B -i.

.TP
.BI -n " <s>"
Only search with and align to a single CM named
.I <s>
from the CM file. Unless 
.B -m
is used, the default CM file will be used and so valid strings for 
.I <s>
are only 'archaea', 'bacteria' and 'eukarya'.
A related option is
.B --aln-one
(see below).

.SH OPTIONS FOR CONTROLLING OUTPUT

.TP 
.B --dna
Output alignments and sequence files as DNA, not as RNA. By default,
the output alignments will be RNA, even if the input sequences in
.I seqfile
were DNA.

.TP
.B --rfonly
Discard insert columns and only include consensus columns in the
output alignments. The alignments will be a fixed,
predicted width (the number of consensus positions for each model),
but will not include all target nucleotides. Note that insert columns
are automatically removed by the 
.B ssu-mask 
program which is recommended prior to inputting alignments into
phylogenetic inference programs and using 
.B --rfonly
can greatly reduce the size of the alignments,
especially for very deep alignments (hundreds of thousands of
sequences). 

.SH OPTIONS FOR SKIPPING THE SEARCH OR ALIGNMENT STAGES

.TP
.B --no-align 
Only perform the search stage (stage 1). Determine
the best-matching model, define the likely begin
and end positions for each SSU (sub)sequence, and extract those
subsequences from 
.I seqfile. 
Do not align each extracted sequence to its best matching model.

.TP
.B --no-search 
Skip the stage 1 search and only perform the alignment stage.
This option should only be used if it is known that each full length
target sequence in
.I seqfile
is a SSU sequence or subsequence that matches
to the CM in the CM file.
This is only allowed if the CM file
contains exactly 1 CM or if the
.BI -n " <s>"
option is used to specify a single CM to use from a multi-CM file.

.SH EXPERT OPTIONS FOR TUNING THE SEARCH STAGE:

.TP
.B --toponly
Only search the top strand of each sequence in stage 1. This option
should only be used if the user is confident no sequences in 
.I seqfile
contain SSU sequences on the opposite strand.
 
.TP
.B --forward
In the stage 1 search, use the HMM Forward algorithm instead of the
HMM Viterbi algorithm. Forward is about three times slower than
Viterbi, but might be more sensitive in some situations. 
 
.TP
.B --global
Require hits in the stage 1 search to globally match the model,
i.e. be full length. By default, hits can locally match the model,
which allows partial SSU sequences to be found and aligned. 
 
.TP
.B --keep-int
Keep some files that are normally removed by the program, including
the 
.B ssu-cmsearch
output from stage 1 and the input to the 
.B ssu-esl-sfetch
program which is used to extract search hits prior to alignment.
 
.SH EXPERT OPTIONS FOR TUNING THE ALIGNMENT STAGE:

.TP
.B --no-trunc
Following the search stage, do not truncate sequences to the begin and
end positions of the best-matching HMM hits. Instead, align the full
target sequences in stage 2.
 
.TP
.BI --aln-one " <s>"
Only create alignments to the CM named
.I <s>.
All CMs will still be used in the search stage.
If the default CM file is used (i.e. if 
.B -m 
is not set), 
.I <s> 
can be 'archaea', 'bacteria', or 'eukarya'.
This option might be useful if the user wants to classify 
archaeal, bacterial, and eukaryotic sequences but only produce
bacterial alignments, for example. If the related
.B -n
option is used for the same case, the user may find the bacterial alignments 
include archaeal and eukaryotic sequences, as well as bacterial ones.
 
.TP
.B --no-prob
Do not include per-nucleotide posterior probabilities that estimate
alignment confidence in the output alignments. These probabilities are
included by default and are used by 
.B ssu-mask
to determine unreliably aligned regions and remove them.
 
.TP
.BI --mxsize " <x>"
Set the maximum allowable dynamic programming matrix size used for
alignment to 
.I <x>
megabytes. By default this size is 4,096 Mb. 
This should be large enough for the vast majority of alignments, 
however if it is not, 
.B ssu-align 
will exit prematurely and report an error message that 
the matrix exceeded it's maximum allowable size. In this case, the
.B --mxsize 
can be used to raise the limit.
