.TH "ssu-prep" 1 "@RELEASEDATE@" "@PACKAGE@ @RELEASE@" "@PACKAGE@ Manual"

.SH NAME
ssu-prep - prepare SSU rRNA sequences for parallel ssu-align jobs

.SH SYNOPSIS

.PP
Add a prefix and suffix to ssu-align job commands as defined in <prefix-suffix-file>:
.PP
.B ssu-prep
.I [options]
.I seqfile
.I output-dir
.I n
.I prefix-suffix-file

.PP
Run all jobs in parallel on one machine with <n> cores:
.PP
.B ssu-prep -x
.I [options]
.I seqfile
.I output-dir
.I n

.PP
Omit prefixes and suffixes from ssu-align job commands, to be manually added later:
.PP
.B ssu-prep -y
.I [options]
.I seqfile
.I output-dir
.I n

.SH DESCRIPTION

.PP
.B ssu-prep 
reads the unaligned FASTA-formatted 
.I seqfile,
splits it up into 
.I n 
smaller sequence files and creates a shell
script that will execute 
.I n 
.B ssu-align 
jobs in parallel, each processing
one of the small sequence files. The results of all jobs will automatically be
merged together by the final job, giving the same results as if a single
.B ssu-align 
job was run for the complete 
.I seqfile.
The advantage of using 
.B ssu-prep
is that it allows the 
.I n
smaller jobs to be run simultaneously, in parallel, either on a
multi-core machine or on a compute cluster, so the final result
is obtained up to (nearly)
.I n 
times faster.
The merging is performed by an internal call to the 
.B ssu-merge
script. See the 
.B ssu-merge 
manual page for more information. 

.PP
All of the 
.B ssu-align 
options (see the  
.B ssu-align
manual page) are available to
.B ssu-prep.
Any of these options that are set on the 
.B ssu-prep
command line will identically set in the 
.B ssu-align
job commands in the output shell script.

The output shell script will be named
.I <output-dir>.ssu-align.sh
and can be executed with the command
.B sh <output-dir>.ssu-align.sh.

.PP
The smaller sequence files created by 
.B ssu-prep
will be named as 
.I seqfile.<i>
where 
.I <i>
is a number ranging from 1 to 
.I n.
By default, 
.B ssu-prep
will try to divide the sequences such that, as nearly as possible, all
jobs process the same number of nucleotides, with the restriction that
sequences are never reordered (by concatenating the
.I n
smaller sequence files in numerical order, the original 
.B seqfile
would be reproduced). 

.PP
.B ssu-prep
will create an output directory called
.I output-dir
into which all output files
will be placed,
including the small sequence files.
When the 
.B ssu-align 
jobs are run, each one will create a subdirectory within 
.I output-dir
called
.I output-dir.<i>
and place its output files there. When the 
.I n
jobs are merged, these directories will be emptied and removed
(unless the 
.B --keep-merge
option is set).

.SH CUSTOMIZING PARALLELIZATION FOR THE SSU-ALIGN JOBS USING PREFIXES AND SUFFIXES

The main purpose of
.B ssu-prep
is to allow simple parallelization of large 
.B ssu-align 
jobs by breaking large jobs into many smaller ones, each of which will
run separately. Currently, the 
.B SSU-ALIGN
package does not support more respectable paralellization strategies
such as MPI, nor does it use threads.

.PP
In order to allow jobs to run in parallel,
.B ssu-prep
allows the user to set a fixed prefix and suffix string to be
added before and after each 
.B ssu-align 
job command. The three different usages listed in the SYNOPSIS above
control how this prefix and suffix are defined.

.PP
In the first case, if neither the
.B -x
nor the
.B -y 
options are used, the prefix and suffix are defined in the
.I <prefix-suffix-file>
as discussed in FORMAT OF THE PREFIX-SUFFIX-FILE below.

.PP
Secondly, if 
.B -x 
is used the job commands will be run all at once on a single multi-core
machine, and so no prefix or suffix is necessary. (Actually, in this
case the suffix used will be ' > /dev/null & ' for all but the final
job, which makes the jobs silently and simultaneously run in the background.)

.PP
Finally, if the user specifies 
.B -y,
no prefix or suffix will be added to the 
.B ssu-align 
job commands, but the user should manually add their own later.
The
.B -y 
option is meant to be useful for users who want the 
jobs to have prefixes and suffixes that are not constant, or that are
more complex than those possible by the simplistic use of a two-line
.B prefix-suffix-file.
For example, the 
.B ssu-align
commands might need to be preceded by a 'ssh <host>;' command, but
where <host> is different for each command.

.SH FORMAT OF THE PREFIX-SUFFIX-FILE

The 
.I prefix-suffix-file
must contain exactly two non-comment lines (comment lines begin with '#'). 
The first line will become a prefix for all 
.B ssu-align
commands and the second line will become a suffix.
For example, if the first line is:

.PP
.B qsub -N ssu-align -o /dev/null -b y -j y -cwd -V '

.PP
And the second line is:

.PP
.B '

.PP
Then a resulting ssu-align job command in the output shell script
might be:

.PP
.B qsub -N ssu-align -o /dev/null -b y -j y -cwd -V ' ssu-align foo/foo.1/my.fa.1 foo/foo.1 '

.PP
In contrast, if the 
.B -y
option is used, specifying no prefix or suffix, the same job command would
appear as:

.PP
.B ssu-align foo/foo.1/my.fa.1 foo/foo.1

.PP
in the output shell script.

.SH SPECIFYING OPTIONS FOR THE PARALLEL ALIGNMENT JOBS

All 
.B ssu-align
options can be set on the 
.B ssu-prep
command line, and they will be added to the 
.B ssu-align
command-line of the resulting parallel jobs in the output shell
script. See the
.B ssu-align
manual page for a list of available options. Additionally, 
.B ssu-prep
specific options are listed below.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B -h
Print brief help; includes version number and summary of
all options.

.TP
.B -x
Specify that all 
.I n
jobs in should be run in parallel on a single machine that has 
.I n
processors (cores).
See the CUSTOMIZING PARALLELIZATION section above for more details.
Note that 
.B ssu-prep 
does not check to make sure your computer actually has 
.I n
processors.

.TP
.B -y
Specify that the 
.B ssu-align 
jobs should have no prefix or suffix. The user should manually add
them to the output shell script later in order to ensure the jobs
actually run in parallel. 
See the CUSTOMIZING PARALLELIZATION section above for more details.

.TP
.B -f
Allow output directory 
.I output-dir
to be deleted and
overwritten. Without this option, if the
.I output-dir
directory already exists, 
.B ssu-prep
exits with an error.

.TP
.B -q
Specify that the third 
.B ssu-prep 
command-line argument, 
.I n,
specifies the desired number of sequences per job, not the number of
total jobs. The number of total jobs will be dependent on the number
of sequences in 
.I seqfile.

.TP
.B -e
Specify that each job should process the same number of sequences,
instead of the same number of total nucleotides, which is the default
behavior.

.TP 
.B --no-bash
Specify that the output shell script that will submit/run all 
.I n
jobs not be written in BASH shell syntax, which it is by default.

.TP 
.B --no-merge
Specify that the final job should not automatically merge the results
of all jobs. The user can still manually merge the jobs using the 
.B ssu-merge 
program after all jobs are finished running.

.TP 
.B --keep-merge
Do not automatically remove the smaller per-job output files once they
have successfully been merged together. If this option is selected,
a shell script called
.I output-dir.cleanup.sh 
will be created that can be used to remove all the smaller per-job
output files at a later time.
